docs: add blogpost about Keptn v2 release candidate (#3199)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/blog/posts/announcing-keptn-v2-release-candidate.md

---
date: 2024-03-07
authors: [agardnerit,bacherfl]
description: >
  Announcing the Official Release Candidate for Keptn v2
categories:
  - Installation
  - Upgrade
comments: true
---

# Announcing the Official Release Candidate for Keptn v2

The Keptn project is proud to announce a release candidate for what will become Keptn v2.
This release candidate provides the project with enough end-user validation
and bug-finding so that we can release Keptn v2.
We anticipate (as long as no release blockers are identified) that Keptn
v2 will be released approximately 1 month after this announcement.

<!-- more -->

## What Problem Does Keptn Solve?

Deploying software using Kubernetes is, on the surface, easy.

> Just use `kubectl` or a GitOps solution like ArgoCD to deploy a YAML file and that's it, right?

Reviewer: let's link to the argo website here

Well, no.
Not normally.
There is a lot more to ensuring a healthy deployment,
and there are a lot of potential problems that can
prevent the successful deployment of a Kubernetes application, such as:

- Not enough resources (i.e. CPU, Memory) being available in the cluster.
- An external dependency (e.g. a Database hosted outside the cluster) not being reachable
- Unhealthy state of your infrastructure (e.g. due to vulnerabilities)
- The cluster or namespace not being monitored correctly - You would not want to deploy into the dark in this case.

> - Unexpected performance degradation after rolling out a new version of your application

Reviewer: some of those lines have `.` at the end and some don't, please stay consistent

Reviewer 2: And, these should be em dashes -- so `--` -- rather than a single hyphen ;-)

This is the problem domain on which Keptn acts.
By using Keptn, in combination with your standard deployment tooling or practices,
you can move from "I guess it's OK" to "I know it's OK".
Keptn allows you to wrap governance and automated checks around the deployment
process to ensure that the end-to-end process of deploying is
healthy and your application is meeting the SLOs you've defined.
This is done by configuring Keptn to execute KeptnTasks and

> KeptnEvaluations before and after the deployment of a workload.

Reviewer: please add x-refs

With these KeptnTasks, you can implement checks that ensure your
infrastructure is in a healthy state before a new version of a deployment is rolled out.
This way, you can avoid the problems mentioned above by:

- Verifying that your cluster has enough resources to run a workload
- Checking the reachability of external services that might be required by your workloads

> - Ensure that your cluster is monitored by your monitoring provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ensuring that your cluster is monitored by your monitoring provider
```

users want to have a dedicated way to promote an application to the next stage in my environment.
Being a recently added feature this is currently hidden behind a feature flag in the release candidate.
However, it can easily be enabled during the installation
of Keptn via the Helm flag: `lifecycleOperator.promotionTasksEnabled: [true|false]`.

Further information can be found in the
[Multi-stage application delivery](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/guides/multi-stage-application-delivery/)
guide.

### Pass OpenTelemetry Contexts through Keptn

Usually, Keptn does not act in isolation during a deployment.
In the logical timeline of events, there will be tools acting prior to
Keptn (such as GitOps tools like ArgoCD) and tools that act after
Keptn (such as security scanning tools or post-deployment checks).

If the tools prior to Keptn begin generating OpenTelemetry data (e.g. Spans and traces),
it would be beneficial to see "Keptn’s portion" of the work in the correct context
(i.e. as part of the same distributed trace).
Similarly, anything that happens after Keptn (but still in the same logical "deployment" operation)
should be included in the end-to-end trace / timing view.

> To achieve this, Keptn now accepts tools to pass w3c trace IDs into Keptn

Reviewer: this could use a link to the w3c trace id page

and Keptn will pass W3C trace IDs out of Keptn

> (thanks to all contributors working on this for providing this functionality!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(thanks to all contributors working on this functionality!)
```

> Now, you can see a true end-to-end picture of everything in the logical operation,

Reviewer: did you mean logical order?

the pre- and post-deployment checks.
- [OpenTelemetry Observability](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/guides/otel/):
This shows how to configure Keptn for making use of its observability features so you
have a holistic overview of your application deployments and any issues that arise during deployment.
- [Multi-stage Application Delivery](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/guides/multi-stage-application-delivery/):
This guide serves as an example of how you can integrate Keptn with ArgoCD and GitHub to
take the previous concepts and apply them across multiple application environments,
giving you full observability of an application deployment from development into production.

Going through these guides will give you a good initial overview of Keptn,
but be sure to also check out the [additional guides](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/guides/).
Also, the list of guides is being updated actively by the maintainers,
so feel free to keep an eye on it to see if there is something new added that you could
potentially also apply to your workflow.

[Keptn v2 Release Candidate 1](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/releases) is available now on GitHub.

> Please provide any feedback via the #keptn Slack channel in the [CNCF Slack workspace](https://communityinviter.com/apps/cloud-native/cncf).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please provide any feedback via the [#keptn Slack channel](https://cloud-native.slack.com/messages/keptn/) in the [CNCF Slack workspace](https://communityinviter.com/apps/cloud-native/cncf).
```

---
date: 2024-03-13
authors: [agardnerit,bacherfl]
description: >
  Announcing the Official Release Candidate for Keptn v2
categories:
  - Installation
  - Upgrade
comments: true
---

# Announcing the Official Release Candidate for Keptn v2

The Keptn project is proud to announce a release candidate for what will become Keptn v2.

> This release candidate provides the project with enough end-user validation
> and bug-finding so that we can release Keptn v2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are sharing this release candidate
so that the community and end users can participate in the testing
to ensure that the actual release is as robust as possible.
```
I'm not in love with my rewrite but the existing sentence is just not true.  The release candidate does nothing to ensure the quality of the release unless people actually try it out.  Perhaps you can word this better.

We anticipate (as long as no release blockers are identified) that Keptn
v2 will be released approximately 1 month after this announcement.

<!-- more -->

## What Problem Does Keptn Solve?

Deploying software using Kubernetes is, on the surface, easy.
Just use `kubectl` or a GitOps solution like ArgoCD to deploy a YAML file and that's it, right?
Well, no.
Not normally.
There is a lot more to ensuring a healthy deployment,
and there are a lot of potential problems that can
prevent the successful deployment of a Kubernetes application, such as:

> - Not enough resources (i.e. CPU, Memory) being available in the cluster.
> - An external dependency (e.g. a Database hosted outside the cluster) not being reachable.
> - Unhealthy state of your infrastructure (e.g. due to vulnerabilities).
> - The cluster or namespace not being monitored correctly - You would not want to deploy into the dark in this case.
> - Unexpected performance degradation after rolling out a new version of your application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Not enough resources (such as CPUs or memory) are available in the cluster
- An external dependency (such as a database that is hosted outside the cluster) is not reachable
- The state of your infrastructure is unhealthy because of vulnerabilities
- The cluster or namespace is not monitored correctly; you do not want to deploy into the dark in this case
- Unexpected performance degradation after rolling out a new version of your application
```

This is the problem domain on which Keptn acts.

> By using Keptn, in combination with your standard deployment tooling or practices,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By using Keptn, in combination with your standard deployment tooling and practices,
```

you can move from "I guess it's OK" to "I know it's OK".
Keptn allows you to wrap governance and automated checks around the deployment
process to ensure that the end-to-end process of deploying is
healthy and your application is meeting the SLOs you've defined.
This is done by configuring Keptn to execute [KeptnTasks](../../docs/reference/crd-reference/task.md) and
[KeptnEvaluations](../../docs/reference/crd-reference/evaluationdefinition.md) before and after the deployment of a workload.

> With these [KeptnTasks](../../docs/reference/crd-reference/task.md), you can implement checks that ensure your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With these `KeptnTasks`, you can implement checks that ensure your
```
Not really necessary to use the link for every mention in the section

infrastructure is in a healthy state before a new version of a deployment is rolled out.
This way, you can avoid the problems mentioned above by:

- Verifying that your cluster has enough resources to run a workload.
- Checking the reachability of external services that might be required by your workloads.
- Ensuring that your cluster is monitored by your monitoring provider.
- Verifying that your monitoring provider did not detect any open problems within your cluster.

> After a successful deployment of a workload, Keptn also provides the means to do post-deployment checks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a successful deployment of a workload, Keptn also provides the means to do post-deployment tasks and evaluations.
```
Using consistent terminology makes this clearer.

These can be crucial in ensuring that the performance of your newly deployed workload meets your expectations,
before promoting it into the next stage.

> ## What’s New in Keptn v2?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What’s new in this build?
```
What do you think?  Some casual readers might see this as "how is Keptn v2 unlike Keptn v1?" -- it's kind of ambiguous.

User feedback to the Keptn project has been clear, and we have listened.

> Keptn v2 brings 3 key new features:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This release candidate introduces three new key features to the previous Keptn build:
```

> - Non-Blocking Tasks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Non-blocking tasks
```

- A new "promotion" stage
- Ability to pass OpenTelemetry contextual information into, and out of, Keptn

> ### Non-Blocking Tasks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Non-blocking tasks
```

Keptn offers the ability to perform arbitrary tasks and SLO
evaluations both before a deployment and after a deployment.
By design, any pre-deployment task or SLO evaluation
which fails will block the deployment.

> Often, this is the behaviour you want – if a downstream dependency is unavailable or unhealthy,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Often, this is the behaviour you want;
if a downstream dependency is unavailable or unhealthy,
```

you probably don't want to complete the deployment.
However, for new Keptn users, this behaviour can appear drastic
and cause deployments to be "pending" without an obvious cause.

> In Keptn v2 this blocking behaviour for pre tasks and evaluations is now configurable.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to say "configurable" or that "it can be turned off"?

Should we mention the main use case, which is for people who want to test the pre-deployment tasks and evaluations without risking that their deployment will be blocked because of a bug in their tasks/evaluations?

When creating the [KeptnConfig](../../docs/reference/crd-reference/config.md) resource,
set `spec.blockDeployment: [true|false]`.
The default behaviour is for Keptn to block deployments (i.e. `spec.blockDeployment: true`)
until the related pre-deployment tasks and
evaluations defined in the Keptn configuration have passed successfully.

> ### The Promotion Stage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### The promotion stage
```
I find it a bit confusing that we sometimes call this feature "promotion stage" and other times call it "multi-stage application delivery".   At the very least, it seems that this paragraph should include the "multi-stage application delivery" string.

Keptn v2 introduces a new "promotion" phase.
Keptn is commonly used alongside [GitOps practices](https://opengitops.dev/) and thus,
users want to have a dedicated way to promote an application to the next stage in my environment.
Being a recently added feature this is currently hidden behind a feature flag in the release candidate.
However, it can easily be enabled during the installation
of Keptn via the Helm flag: `lifecycleOperator.promotionTasksEnabled: [true|false]`.

Further information can be found in the
[Multi-stage application delivery](../../docs/guides/multi-stage-application-delivery.md)
guide.

### Pass OpenTelemetry Contexts through Keptn

Usually, Keptn does not act in isolation during a deployment.
In the logical timeline of events, there will be tools acting prior to
Keptn (such as GitOps tools like [ArgoCD](https://argoproj.github.io/cd/)) and tools that act after
Keptn (such as security scanning tools or post-deployment checks).

> If the tools prior to Keptn begin generating OpenTelemetry data (e.g. Spans and traces),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the tools that execute before Keptn begins generating OpenTelemetry data (e.g. Spans and traces),
```

> it would be beneficial to see "Keptn’s portion" of the work in the correct context

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it is beneficial to see the Keptn portio of the work in the correct context
```
We can't put the 's on Keptn -- it invalidates the trademark

(i.e. as part of the same distributed trace).
Similarly, anything that happens after Keptn (but still in the same logical "deployment" operation)
should be included in the end-to-end trace / timing view.
To achieve this, Keptn now accepts tools to pass [W3C trace IDs](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) into Keptn

> and Keptn will pass W3C trace IDs out of Keptn

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and Keptn passes W3C trace IDs out of Keptn
```

> (thanks to all contributors working on this functionality!)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(Thanks to all contributors working on this functionality!)
```

Now, you can see a true end-to-end picture of everything in the logical order,
potentially from "PR merged" all the way to "deployment complete".

![dev-to-proc](./announcing-keptn-v2-release-candidate/dev-to-prod.png)

## How to get started

> To get started with Keptn, head over to the [Keptn installation instructions](../../docs/installation/index.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get started with Keptn, follow the [Keptn installation instructions](../../docs/installation/index.md).
```

After installing Keptn, you can get started by going through the several guides listed below that

> will introduce you to the features provided by Keptn step by step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
introduce you to the features provided by Keptn step by step.
```

This shows you how to configure your applications to be deployed with Keptn.
- [Deployment tasks](../../docs/guides/tasks.md):
This builds up on the previous guide and will explain in detail how you can enhance your application
deployments by adding pre- and post-deployment tasks to ensure you deploy into a healthy environment.
- [Evaluations](../../docs/guides/evaluations.md):
This shows you how to use Keptn to evaluate metrics relevant for an application as part of
the pre- and post-deployment checks.
- [OpenTelemetry Observability](../../docs/guides/otel.md):
This shows how to configure Keptn for making use of its observability features, so you
have a holistic overview of your application deployments and any issues that arise during deployment.
- [Multi-stage Application Delivery](../../docs/guides/multi-stage-application-delivery.md):
This guide serves as an example of how you can integrate Keptn with ArgoCD and GitHub to
take the previous concepts and apply them across multiple application environments,
giving you full observability of an application deployment from development into production.

Going through these guides will give you a good initial overview of Keptn,

> but be sure to also check out the [additional guides](../../docs/guides/index.md).

Reviewer 2: What about `use-cases`?  I'm not actually sure that we need this sentence.  The links get them into some basic information.  If they can't figure out to look around at the rest of the documentation for more information, are they too stupid to be running Keptn?

Also, the list of guides is being updated actively by the maintainers,

> so feel free to keep an eye on it to see if there is something new added that you could

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
keep an eye on it to see if there is something new added that you could
```

---
date: 2024-03-07
authors: [agardnerit]
description: >
  Announcing the Official Release Candidate for Keptn v2
categories:
  - Installation
  - Upgrade
comments: true
---

# Announcing the Official Release Candidate for Keptn v2

> The Keptn project is proud to announce a release candidate for what will become Keptn v2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Keptn project is proud to announce a release candidate
for what will become the first stable release of Keptn v2.
```
I don't think we will ever have a v2 release...

> This release candidate will provide the project with enough end-user validation and bug-finding so that we can release Keptn v2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This release candidate provides the project
with enough end-user validation and bug-finding so that we can release Keptn v2.
```
Flo, maybe you can do better on the wording?

We anticipate (as long as no release blockers are identified) that Keptn v2 will be released approximately 1 month after this announcement.

<!-- more -->

## What Problem Does Keptn Solve?

Deploying software using Kubernetes is, on the surface, easy. Just use `kubectl` or a GitOps solution like ArgoCD to deploy a YAML file and that’s it, right?

Well, no. Not normally. There is a lot more to ensuring a healthy deployment. The pod(s) may be running, but that doesn’t automatically mean that the application is healthy.

> This is the problem domain that Keptn acts upon. By using Keptn, in combination with your standard deployment tooling or practices, you can move from "I **guess** it’s OK" to "I know it’s OK".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the problem domain on which Keptn acts. By using Keptn, in combination with your standard deployment tooling or practices, you can move from "I **guess** it’s OK" to "I know it’s OK".
```

Keptn allows you to wrap governance and automated checks around the deployment process to ensure that the end-to-end process of deploying is healthy, and your application is meeting the SLOs you’ve defined.

## What’s New in Keptn v2?

> User feedback to the Keptn project has been clear, and we have listened. Keptn v2 will bring 3 key new features:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User feedback to the Keptn project has been clear, and we have listened. Keptn v2 brings 3 key new features:
```

1.	Non-Blocking Tasks 
2.	A new "promotion" stage
3.	Ability to pass OpenTelemetry contextual information into, and out of, Keptn

### Non-Blocking Tasks

> Keptn offers the ability to perform arbitrary tasks and SLO evaluations both before a deployment and after a deployment. By design, any pre-deployment task or SLO evaluation which fails will block the deployment. Often, this is the behaviour you want – if a downstream dependency is unavailable or unhealthy, you probably don’t want to complete the deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keptn offers the ability to perform arbitrary tasks and SLO evaluations
both before a deployment and after a deployment.
By design, any pre-deployment task or SLO evaluation that fails
blocks the deployment.
Often, this is the behaviour you want –-
if a downstream dependency is unavailable or unhealthy, 
you probably don’t want to complete the deployment.
```

However, for new Keptn users, this behaviour can appear drastic and cause deployments to be "pending" without an obvious cause.

> In Keptn v2 this blocking behaviour for pre tasks and evaluationis now configurable. When creating the [KeptnConfig](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/reference/crd-reference/config/) resource, set `spec.blockDeployment: [true|false]`. The default behaviour is for Keptn to block deployments (ie. `spec.blockDeployment: true`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Keptn v2, this blocking behaviour for pre-deployment tasks and evaluations
can be disabled for the cluster.
When creating the
[KeptnConfig](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/reference/crd-reference/config/)
resource, set `spec.blockDeployment: [true|false]`.
The default behaviour is for Keptn to block deployments
(ie. `spec.blockDeployment: true`).
When this field is set to `false`,
you can see the results of the pre-deployment tasks and evaluations
that have been defined
without actually blocking your deployment.
```

### The Promotion Stage

> Keptn v2 introduces a new "promotion" stage. Keptn is commonly used alongside [GitOps practices](https://opengitops.dev/) and thus, users want to have a dedicated way to promote an application to the next stage in my environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keptn v2 introduces a new "promotion" stage.
Keptn is commonly used alongside
[GitOps practices](https://opengitops.dev/)
and thus, users want to have a dedicated way
to promote an application to the next stage in  the environment.
```

The new stage is enabled by default and can be controlled via the Helm flag: `lifecycleOperator.promotionTasksEnabled: [true|false]`

> Further information can be found in the [official documentation](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/guides/multi-stage-application-delivery/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Further information can be found in the
[Multi-stage application delivery](https://keptn.sh/stable/docs/guides/multi-stage-application-delivery/)
guide.
```

### Pass OpenTelemetry Contexts through Keptn

> Usually, Keptn will not act in isolation during a deployment. In the logical timeline of events, there will be tools acting prior to Keptn (such as GitOps tools like ArgoCD) and tools that act after Keptn (such as security scanning tools or post-deployment checks).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Usually, Keptn does not act in isolation during a deployment.
In the logical timeline of events, other tools act prior to Keptn
(such as GitOps tools like ArgoCD)
and and after Keptn
(such as security scanning tools or post-deployment checks).
```

> If the tools prior to Keptn begin generating OpenTelemetry data (eg. Spans and traces), it would be beneficial to see "Keptn’s portion" of the work in the correct context (ie. As part of the same distributed trace). Similarly, anything that happens after Keptn (but still in the same logical "deployment" operation) should be included in the end-to-end trace / timing view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the tools prior to Keptn begin generating OpenTelemetry data
(such as spans and traces),
it is beneficial to see the Keptn portion of the work in the correct context
(ie. as part of the same distributed trace).
Similarly, anything that happens after Keptn
(but still in the same logical "deployment" operation)
should be included in the end-to-end trace / timing view.
```

> To achieve this, Keptn now accepts tools to pass w3c trace IDs into Keptn and Keptn will pass W3C trace IDs out of Keptn (thanks to [@geoffrey1330](https://github.com/geoffrey1330) for providing this functionality!)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To achieve this, Keptn now accepts tools to pass w3c trace IDs into Keptn
and Keptn passes W3C trace IDs out of Keptn.
```

> Now, you will see a true end-to-end picture of everything in the logical operation, potentially from "PR merged" all the way to "deployment complete".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, you can see a true end-to-end picture of everything in the logical operation,
potentially from "PR merged" all the way to "deployment complete".
```

> ## [Download Keptn v2 RC1 Now!](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/lifecycle-toolkit/keptn)

Reviewer 2: I don't think we want this link in a header...

> ## [Download Keptn v2 RC1 Now!](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/lifecycle-toolkit/keptn)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Download Keptn v2 RC1 Now!

```

> [Keptn v2 Release Candidate 1](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/releases) is available now on GitHub. Please provide any feedback via the #keptn Slack channel in the [CNCF Slack workspace](https://communityinviter.com/apps/cloud-native/cncf).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Keptn v2 Release Candidate 1](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/releases)
is available now on GitHub.
Please provide any feedback via the #keptn Slack channel in th
 [CNCF Slack workspace](https://communityinviter.com/apps/cloud-native/cncf).
```
